Add semantic conventions for thread.name and thread.id span attributes (#789)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification: specification/trace/semantic_conventions/span-general.md

Given the sensitive nature of this information, SDKs and exporters SHOULD drop these attributes by
default and then provide a configuration parameter to turn on retention for use cases where the
information is required and would not violate any policies or regulations.

## General thread attributes

These attributes may be used for any operation to store information about

> a span's current execution thread.

Reviewer: What is the intention here? It is quite common, especially in the async frameworks, for a span to jump around multiple threads.

Reviewer 2: Right. Is this trying to capture information about the unit of computation that may be jumping around multiple OS threads? I don't know if it is common for async frameworks to have accessible identifiers for async operations, but if they do this is what would be better recorded and match with what is needed in Erlang's case (a span shouldn't jump Erlang pids but can jump around multiple OS threads by the scheduler, so what OS thread a span is "on" is of no use).

Reviewer 3: We could define this more precisely as _the thread that started the span_.

Ideally this would be added by a `SpanProcessor` that sets this in `OnStart` as @Oberon00 suggested (https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/issues/788#issuecomment-672726097).

Reviewer 4: Why "ideally" added by a `SpanProcessor`? What's bad in e.g. `SpanBuilder` doing that?

Reviewer 3: This makes it configurable so only users interested in it plug that particular `SpanProcessor` into their pipeline to have this additional information added. An option on the (default) `SpanBuilder` would also work, however.

Reviewer 3: The _ideally_ was actually not meant to say that `SpanProcessor` would suit better than `SpanBuilder` for this but rather that we would ideally provide an out-of-the-box way to set this instead of asking users or instrumentation to do it manually if it's the same for all and thus easy to implement once globally, similar to the `Span.RecordException` convenience API.

Reviewer 5: I think `thread.name` can be a useful attribute. Thread names typically are assigned by the application programmer and as such convey important diagnostic information that is useful to have in the telemetry.

As for `thread.id` I concur with the above question, I do not understand what the value of the attribute. Is the intent here that it can be used for correlation between spans that are not otherwise connected via parent/child relationship or via links but are logically related because they are executed by the same thread?

Reviewer 4: It is possible to (mis)-configure thread pool and produce several threads with the same name. In this case `thread.id` may be useful.

Author: > We could define this more precisely as the thread that started the span.

That was exactly the point. I've fixed the spec, thanks.

Regarding `SpanProcessor`: do you think that I should include this recommendation in the spec?
I've briefly checked a few OTel implementations for different languages and it looks like that: in Java & JS `SpanProcessor#onStart()` gets a read-only `ReadableSpan` instance (which differs from [SDK spec](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/trace/sdk.md#onstartspan)), .Net, Python and Ruby `SpanProcessor`s (or `ActivityProcessor`) receive R/W span/activity instances in both `onStart()` and `onEnd()` method -- again, contrary to the spec. It would be impossible right now to implement a `SpanProcessor` that enriches a passed span with thread info in at least two languages - without some changes in their respective OTel implementations.

Reviewer 4: I don't think there is any need to specify or recommend how and when these attributes should be added.

| Attribute name | Notes and examples                                       |
|----------------|----------------------------------------------------------|

> | `thread.id`    | Current thread id, if exposed by the platform. E.g. `42` |

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
| `thread.id`    | Current "managed" thread ID (as opposed to OS thread ID). E.g. `42` |
```

I think the "if exposed ..." is redundant, you don't have a required column here anyway.

| `thread.name`  | Current thread name. E.g. `main`                         |

Examples of where `thread.id` and `thread.name` can be extracted from:

| Launguage or platform | `thread.id`                            | `thread.name`                      |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| JVM                   | `Thread.currentThread().getId()`       | `Thread.currentThread().getName()` |
| .Net                  | `Thread.CurrentThread.ManagedThreadId` | `Thread.CurrentThread.Name`        |
| Python                | `threading.current_thread().ident`     | `threading.current_thread().name`  |

> | Ruby                  |                                        | `Thread.current.name`              |

Reviewer 5: For C++ `std::this_thread::get_id()`. IIRC std threads have no names.

Author: Added, thanks!

## General thread attributes

These attributes may be used for any operation to store information about
a thread that started a span.

| Attribute name | Notes and examples                                                  |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `thread.id`    | Current "managed" thread ID (as opposed to OS thread ID). E.g. `42` |
| `thread.name`  | Current thread name. E.g. `main`                                    |

Examples of where `thread.id` and `thread.name` can be extracted from:

| Launguage or platform | `thread.id`                            | `thread.name`                      |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------|
| JVM                   | `Thread.currentThread().getId()`       | `Thread.currentThread().getName()` |
| .Net                  | `Thread.CurrentThread.ManagedThreadId` | `Thread.CurrentThread.Name`        |
| Python                | `threading.current_thread().ident`     | `threading.current_thread().name`  |
| Ruby                  |                                        | `Thread.current.name`              |

> | C++                   | `std::this_thread::get_id`             |                                    |

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
| C++                   | `std::this_thread::get_id()`             |                                    |
```

> | C++                   | `std::this_thread::get_id()`             |                                    |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| C++                   | `std::this_thread::get_id()`             |                                    |
| Erlang               | `erlang:system_info(scheduler_id)` |                                  |
```

Given the sensitive nature of this information, SDKs and exporters SHOULD drop these attributes by
default and then provide a configuration parameter to turn on retention for use cases where the
information is required and would not violate any policies or regulations.

## General thread attributes

These attributes may be used for any operation to store information about
a thread that started a span.

| Attribute name | Notes and examples                                                  |
|----------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `thread.id`    | Current "managed" thread ID (as opposed to OS thread ID). E.g. `42` |
| `thread.name`  | Current thread name. E.g. `main`                                    |

Examples of where `thread.id` and `thread.name` can be extracted from:

| Launguage or platform | `thread.id`                            | `thread.name`                      |
|-----------------------|----------------------------------------|------------------------------------|

> | JVM                   | `Thread.currentThread().getId()`       | `Thread.currentThread().getName()` |

Reviewer 7: `Thread.currentThread().getId()` is deprecated since java 19. There i a `Thread.currentThread().threadId()` instead.

Reviewer 8: hi @johantiden! this page has been moved to another repo: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/main/docs/general/attributes.md#general-thread-attributes

can you open an issue (or PR) over there? thanks

Reviewer 3: I opened an issue in https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/1375 so we don't miss it as this PR here was closed 4 years ago.

Reviewer 7: Thanks for the pointers! I just called it as I saw it. I came to this commit from the original pull request.
